# Machine Learning Project, 2022/

```
Prepared by Prof. Margarida Silveira, Prof. Catarina Barata and Prof. Jorge Marques
```
# 1 Introduction

The Machine Learning project should be done in groups of 2 students, using the Python program-
ming language.
The project is split into 2 parts (regression and image analysis) and each part comprises 2
questions with deliverables for evaluation.
The programming language used in the project is Python because it has powerful libraries
for building Machine Learning applications and it is a widespread language in industry. The first
problem session in the Machine Learning course is devoted to the basics of programming in Python.
Each group should work alone. Consultation of other people, as well as exchange of ideas or
software, are not allowed and may invalidate the work. Instructors will only answer clarification
questions, but all the exercises need to be fully solved by the students.

# 2 Student Evaluation

Student evaluation will take into account:

- interaction with the teacher during the laboratory sessions - this is an individual assessment
    of each group member, thus both students must actively solve the project and be acquainted
    with the work;
- statistical performance of the algorithms developed by the group, evaluated on an independent
    data set;
- final report (maximum length of 10 pages, font size 12 pt) describing the methodologies
    adopted by the group, including figures and statistical evaluation.

Each group should submit the output of the proposed algorithms using an independent data set
(test set) for each of the four questions until the end of the deadlines, as well as the Python code
used to solve them. The outputs will be compared with the ground truth by the teaching team and
the results (a leaderboard with the scores achieved by each group) will be published on the Fenix
web page. Attendance to the laboratory sessions is mandatory and submissions from groups who
fail to do sowill not be evaluated.

# 3 Datasets and Project Submissions

The training and test data for each of the project questions will be made available by the teaching
team, through the course webpage on Fenix. For each question, the students will have access to a
training set (feature vectors and real outputs) and a test set (just the feature vectors).
All data will be stored innumpy(.npy) format.
The students must implement and train their machine learning approaches using the training
set. There are no restrictions regarding the number of machine learning models that the students


can research and try. However, in each of the project questions theymust pick only oneto apply
to the test set and perform the submission.
Project submissions should be made through Fenix, in the appropriate section. For each question
the students must submit azipfile containing: i) the output of their model of choice on the test
set; and ii) the code. The predictions must respect the same format as that of the output within
the training set.
The assessment of the performance on the test set will carried out by the teaching team using
appropriate statistical metrics. The scores achieved by each group will be made available on the
course webpage.

# 4 Part 1 - Regression with Synthetic Data

## 4.1 First Problem - Basic Linear Regression

The first problem is a basic linear regression problem.
Consider a training set withn= 100examples

```
Ttrain= {$(x^1,y^1),...,(x^n,y^n)}
```

where each example comprises a feature vector,x(i) ∈R^10 , with 10 features, and an outcome
y(i)∈R, fori= 1,...,n.
We wish to train a linear predictor

```
yˆ=f(x) = [1 $(x^T)]β,
```

using the sum of squared errors (SSE) criterion, computed in the training set.
To evaluate the performance, the estimated predictor should be applied to an independent set
of data (test set) withn′= 1000examples

```
Ttest= {$(x^1,y^1),...,(x^n,y^n)}
```

provided in Fenix web page. The students should predict the outcome for each test example
ˆy(i),i= 1,...,n′and send this information to the teaching team through the Fenix platform. The
comparison between the predictions yˆ(i) and the true values y(i) will be done by the teaching team
since the test outcomes will not be given to the students. The metric used by the teaching team to
evaluate the submissions will the be the SSE.

## 4.2 Second Problem - Linear Regression with Outliers

The second problem is similar to the previous one but it has a major difference: some of the training
examples (about 20%) areoutliers. This means that these examples are not generated by the same
probabilistic model used to generate the other data and the predictor will fail to predict the outcome
in such examples.
The goal of this problem is to devise a method to estimate a predictor in the presence of outliers
in the training data. Of course, you may apply the same method adopted in the previous problem
(where there were no outliers) but this will probably lead to bad prediction results because you are
trying to apply the same prediction model to both types of examples.


```
In fact, the training set is given by
```
```
Ttrain= {$(x^1,y^1),...,(x^n,y^n)}
```
as before, but we do not know which examples aregoodand which arenot.
When it comes to evaluating the model, we assume that the test set,Ttest,does not have any
outliers. This means that in the testing phase we know which examples are good and which are
bad, and we are only interested in characterizing the performance of the predictor in the inliers.
The students should predict the outcome for each test example yˆ(i),i= 1,...,n′and send this
information to the teaching team through the Fenix platform. The metric used by the teaching
team to evaluate the submissions will the be SSE.

## 4.3 Suggestions

- read the slides (linear regression Chapters 1,2,3);
- try to implement the linear predictor using vectors, matrices and algebraic operations available
    in thenumpypackage;
- check the linear regression examples available in the scikit-learn^1 package;
- visualize the outcomes and prediction errors of the developed models.

# 5 Part 2 - Image Analysis

The second part is devoted to the analysis of butterfly images. Our goal is to classify and segment
two types of patterns that develop in the wings of these butterflies: the spots and the eyespots.
Spots are patterns that develop a single spot of color. Eyespots are patterns that develop spots
and rings of color. Both types are illustrated in Figure 1.
The detection of the two types of patterns in the butterfly images is outside the scope of this
work. This was done automatically for a large number of butterflies of different species using a well
known object detection method known as YOLO [1]. After detection, the patterns bounding boxes
have been resized to a common size of 30x30 pixels.

## 5.1 First Task

The first classification task is a binary one, where we want to create a model that predicts the type
of pattern that has been detected. For this task the label is either 0 (spot) or 1 (eyespot). Since the
images are in color, the patterns have 3 color channels (RGB), thus each input is 30x30x3. Note
that the dataset is imbalanced, since there is a big difference in the number of spots and eyespots
in our dataset. The metric used by the teaching team to evaluate the submissions for this task will
be the F1 score.

5.1.1 Suggestions

- investigate which are the most suitable classifiers for image tasks;
- investigate ways to deal with imbalance in classification tasks.

(^1) https://scikit-learn.org/stable/


```
Figure 1: Image of a butterfly where eyespots are shown in orange and spots are shown in pink.
```
```
Figure 2: An eyespot image and its ground truth segmentation mask.
```
## 5.2 Second Task

The second task consists in the segmentation of a particular type of eyespot that develops in
butterflies of the bicyclus anynana species. These eyespots have a white center, surrounded by a
black ring and then a golden ring. Our goal is to segment three distinct areas: 1) the white ring,
2) the black and gold ring combined, and 3) the background:
This task can be regarded as a pixel classification task. In this case we want to classify each pixel
in a 30x30 RGB eyespot image using as features the set of pixels in a 5x5 neighborhood surrounding
it. The classification is a multiclass problem for which the label is an integer from 0 to 2, denoting
background, rings, and white center, respectively. For this task, the segmentation masks used for
training have been created by manually drawing the three areas and assigning the desired label to
all the pixels in the same region, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Note that this dataset is also imbalanced, since there is a big difference in the number of pixels
in the three areas of the eyespots.
The metric used by the teaching team to evaluate the submissions for this task will be the
Balanced Accuracy.


5.2.1 Suggestions

- do not use thresholding or circle detection methods, and instead use the classification methods
    learned in class;
- check functionsextract_patches_2dandreconstruct_from_patches_2d from the
    skimage toolbox.

# References

```
[1] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick and A. Farhadi, "You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-
Time Object Detection," 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2016, pp. 779-
```


